type	 program.program_acronym	clinical_study_id	clinical_study_designation	clinical_study_name	clinical_study_description	clinical_study_type	date_of_iacuc_approval	dates_of_conduct	accession_id	study_disposition
study	CMCP	Targeted Bisulfite Sequencing	OSA03	Comparative analysis using whole genome bisulfite sequencing of human and canine osteosarcoma	Osteosarcoma is an aggressive tumor of the bone that primarily affects young adults and adolescents largely characterized by genomic chaos and heterogeneity. While inactivation of tumor protein p53 (TP53) is nearly universal, other high frequency mutations or structural variations have not been identified. Despite this genomic heterogeneity, key conserved transcriptional programs associated with survival have been identified across human, canine and induced murine osteosarcoma. The epigenomic landscape, including DNA methylation, plays a key role in establishing transcriptional programs in all cell types. The role of epigenetic dysregulation has been studied in a variety of cancers, but has yet to be explored at scale in osteosarcoma. Genome-wide DNA methylation patterns were examined in 24 human and 44 canine osteosarcoma samples identifying groups of highly correlated DNA methylation marks in human and canine osteosarcoma samples. We also link specific DNA methylation patterns to key transcriptional programs in both human and canine osteosarcoma. Building on previous work, we built a DNA methylation-based measure for the presence and abundance of various immune cell types in osteosarcoma. Finally, we determined that the underlying state of the tumor, and not changes in cell composition, were the main driver of differences in DNA methylation across the human and canine samples. In addition to the canine BAM files made available on the ICDC, raw sequencing data for human and canine is available in the Sequence Read Archive (SRA) and can be accessed through BioProject accession PRJNA629591.	Genomics		November 1999 - June 2013	000016	Unrestricted
